Add the LedgerHD initial sketch (#4296)
input-output-hk/ouroboros-network: ouroboros-consensus/docs/future-ledger-hd.md

Consensus teams on 2022-01-17 about the future steps on UTxO-HD which would not
make sense to be called this way anymore in future versions and therefore we
propose Ledger-HD as a replacement.

Below, we outline the tables that are expected to be moved to the disk, their
dynamics, the main computations that will leave the Ledger and some open
questions.

This is meant to be just a sketch, details are not worked out yet.

## Scope of Ledger-HD

The plan for Ledger-HD is to move the following tables to the disk:

- The unified map of `rewards`, `delegations`, `pointers` and `deposits`

```haskell
( ne :: NewEpochState era )
  & ( nesEs     :: NewEpochState      era  -> EpochState         era  )
  & ( esLState  :: EpochState         era  -> LedgerState        era  )
  & ( lsDPState :: LedgerState        era  -> DPState (EraCrypto era) )
  & ( dpsDState :: DPState (EraCrypto era) -> DState  (EraCrypto era) )
  & ( dsUnified :: DState  (EraCrypto era) -> UMap    (EraCrypto era) )
   
data UMap c = UMap !(Map (Credential 'Staking c) (Trip c)) !(Map Ptr (Credential 'Staking c)) 
```

> **_NOTE:_** The `deposits` don't seem to be in-place yet? For me it still is a

> > TriMap

Reviewer: it is there in the `master` branch now, maybe you have a older version?

Author: That would explain it, yeah :smile:

> - The stake distribution per stake credential

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The current stake distribution per stake credential
```

```haskell
( ne :: NewEpochState era )
  & ( nesEs           :: NewEpochState era -> EpochState                  era  )
  & ( esLState        :: EpochState    era -> LedgerState                 era  )
  & ( lsUTxOState     :: LedgerState   era -> UTxOState                   era  )
  & ( utxosStakeDistr :: UTxOState     era -> IncrementalStake (EraCrypto era) )
  
data IncrementalStake c = IStake
  { credMap :: !(Map (Credential 'Staking c) Coin)
  , ptrMap :: !(Map Ptr Coin)
  }  
```

- The stake snapshots

```haskell
( ne :: NewEpochState era )
  & ( nesEs       :: NewEpochState era -> EpochState           era  )
  & ( esSnapshots :: EpochState    era -> SnapShots (EraCrypto era) )
  
data SnapShots c = SnapShots
  { ssStakeMark          :: SnapShot c -- Lazy on purpose

>   , ssStakeMarkPoolDistr :: PoolDistr c -- Lazy on purpose

Reviewer: Note that after CIP-1694 is complete, we will probably also have a `ssStakeMarkDRepDistr` with a similar type, `Map (KeyHash 'DRep c) Coin`.

  , ssStakeSet           :: !(SnapShot c)
  , ssStakeGo            :: !(SnapShot c)
  , ssFee                :: !Coin
  }  
  
data SnapShot c = SnapShot
  { ssStake       :: !(Stake c)

>   , ssDelegations :: !(VMap VB VB (Credential 'Staking c) (KeyHash 'StakePool c))

Reviewer: Note that after CIP-1694 is complete, we will probably also have a `ssDRepDelegations` with a similar type, `VMap VB VB (Credential 'Staking c) (KeyHash 'DRep c)`.

  , ssPoolParams  :: !(VMap VB VB (KeyHash 'StakePool c) (PoolParams c))
  }  
  
newtype Stake c = Stake
  { unStake :: VMap VB VP (Credential 'Staking c) (CompactForm Coin)
  }  
  
newtype PoolDistr c = PoolDistr
  { unPoolDistr ::
      Map (KeyHash 'StakePool c) (IndividualPoolStake c)
  }  
  
data IndividualPoolStake c = IndividualPoolStake
  { individualPoolStake    :: !Rational
  , individualPoolStakeVrf :: !(Hash c (VerKeyVRF c))
  }  
```

> > **_TODO:_** All of the maps?

Reviewer: We probably also want the reward update:

https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-ledger/blob/3c4835dc4fe80a19f5714f576c49926d6a58c563/eras/shelley/impl/src/Cardano/Ledger/Shelley/RewardUpdate.hs#L91

the "lens" for it is `NewEpochState -> Maybe RewardUpdate`.

## Dynamics of these maps

### Unified map

On each application of a block (i.e. the `BBODY` rule) and each tick (i.e. the
`TICK` rules) it can be known what entries of this map are needed to carry the

> execution. Therefore it fits the current design of UTxO-HD. 

Author: Yes for this map, and the "big" ones we were considering will not be given to the ledger as you correctly inferred below

- Before calling the ledger rule we can query for the needed entries
- We can present the ledger with the values they asked for, but restricted to
  the data available in the disk + changelog
- The ledger will either provide diffs for the given values or will return
  updated values that we can then diff with the provided ones

> - The resulting differences can be included in the current definition of the

Author: Nope, clarified

  `DbChangelog`.
  
> **_PLAN:_** Consensus will have a new table on the `LedgerTables` that will
> represent the unified map. Perhaps even 4 tables or a table of triplets. It
> will have its own place on the `DbChangelog` too. The flow above describes the
> general strategy for calling the `BBODY` rule, i.e. `(re)applyBlockOpts` and
> for calling the `TICK` rule, i.e. `applyTickOpts`.

### Stake distribution

The update to this map is performed by `updateStakeDistribution`. It is known
before calling the `BBODY` rule which UTxOs are going to be deleted and the rule
execution logic itself knows the UTxOs that are going to be added. Therefore we
can follow a logic similar to the above:

- Before calling the ledger rule we can query for the needed entries
- We can present the ledger with the values they asked for, but restricted to
  the data available in the disk + changelog
- The ledger will either provide diffs for the given values or will return
  updated values that we can then diff with the provided ones
- The resulting differences can be included in the current definition of the
  `DbChangelog`.
  
> **_PLAN:_** Consensus will have a new table on the `LedgerTables` that will

> > represent the Incremental stake distribution (maybe two tables, one for creds

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> represent the incremental stake distribution (maybe two tables, one for creds
```

> one for ptrs). It will have its own place on the `DbChangelog` too. The flow
> above describes the general strategy for calling the `BBODY` rule, i.e.
> `(re)applyBlockOpts`.

### Stake snapshots

> The snapshots are rotated by the `snapTransition` rule. This is the most

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's worth mentioning where this rule is called (I think by the `TICK` rule, right?)

complicated of the three because it involves accessing the unified map and the
`IncrementalStake` in their entirety in order to fold them. We do these two
steps:

```
step1 = (dom activeDelegs ◁ credStake) ∪ (dom activeDelegs ◁ ptrStake)
step2 =  aggregate (dom activeDelegs ◁ rewards) step1
```

Where 
- `activeDelegs` comes from the delegations in the unified map,
- `rewards` come from the unified map,
- `credStake` and `ptrStake` come from the incremental stake

However, there is an important note here. The `ssStakeMark` is only used to be
put in `ssStakeSet` on the next snapshot rotation, then `ssStakeSet` is only
used to be put in `ssStakeGo`, and `ssStakeGo` is only used to prepare the
`PulsingRewUpdate`. This is done in `PulsingReward.startStep` and it also uses
the `rewards` map of the unified map. Assuming the reward calculation is done

> outside of the ledger rules, the snapshot is not really needed by the ledger.

Reviewer 2: From the preceding discussion, it is unclear how we avoid querying the entire delegations map? Is the fact that `activeDelegs` is a small set the key here?

Reviewer 2: Or is the fact that we're doing the calculation outside the ledger rules the key piece of information here? If so we should probably underline the fact that Ledger HD will require a Consensus-Ledger bridge, and hint at where we think this bridge ought to live (ie Consensus or Ledger).

Author: It is the latter, I have clarified it a bit at the bottom.

`Shelley.Rules.Rupd` and `Shelley.Rules.Tick`) is that on each ticking we pulse
a chunk of the rewards update so that when we reach the epoch boundary we want
to have pulsed through the whole `ssStakeGo` snapshot that was used when
creating the pulser.

In the end, the reward computation has to produce a `RewardUpdate`:
```haskell
data RewardUpdate c = RewardUpdate
  { deltaT :: !DeltaCoin
  , deltaR :: !DeltaCoin
  , rs :: !(Map (Credential 'Staking c) (Set (Reward c)))
  , deltaF :: !DeltaCoin
  , nonMyopic :: !(NonMyopic c)
  }
```

where we will use the `delta*` fields to update the treasury, reserves and fee
pot on the `NEWEPOCH` rule. We also use the `rs` field when calling
`updateRewards` which happens also on `NEWEPOCH`.

If Consensus can compute the `RewardUpdate` (possibly on a separate thread that
traverses the map at its own pace?) then we can provide the `RewardUpdate` to
the `NEWEPOCH` rule so that the pots can be updated.

> **_PLAN:_** Consensus will compute the rewards outside of the Ledger and will
> provide the `RewardUpdate` to the ledger so that it can modify the pots and
> also produce diffs for the unified map's `Rewards` field. Ledger will not

> > compute the `RewardUpdate` thus the pulser becomes dead code.

Author: I think I misworded the sentence. I was meaning:

> Consensus will compute the rewards outside of the Ledger and will
> provide the `RewardUpdate` to the Ledger so that the Ledger can modify the pots and
> also the Ledger can produce diffs for the unified map's `Rewards` field based on the withdrawals happening in this block

> > compute the `RewardUpdate` thus the pulser becomes dead code.

Reviewer: Sorry if I am being overly picky! This doesn't sound right to me:

> [Consensus] will provide the RewardUpdate to the Ledger

and also this:

> the Ledger can produce diffs for the unified map's Rewards field

---

How about something like this:

> **_PLAN:_** Consensus will compute the rewards outside of the Ledger and will
> provide the _parts_ of the `RewardUpdate` to the ledger. In particular, on the epoch
> boundary, it will provide `deltaT`, `deltaR`, and `deltaF`.
> Ledger will not compute the `RewardUpdate` thus the pulser becomes dead code.
>
> Moreover, the ledger will provide a function `f :: Block -> Set (StakeCredential c)`
> so that Consensus can supply Ledger with only the part of the `UMap` (the unified map)
> that it requires. In particular, Consensus will have to apply the
> `rs :: !(Map (Credential 'Staking c) (Set (Reward c)))` field of the reward update
> to the unified map on the epoch boundary, _prior_ to computing this view for the ledger
> (to ensure that reward withdrawals are correct within the given block).

## Snapshots and Leader Schedule

The `checkIsLeader` functions for Praos and TPraos makes use of the stake
distribution by stake pool in the `LedgerView` (see the definitions in
`ouroboros-consensus-protocol`). If the snapshots (and therefore the
`ssStakeMarkPoolDistr` field) reside in the Consensus side, we can produce the
relevant stake distributions when needed and don't involve the ledger. In any
case this functionality is in between Ledger and Consensus so it makes sense to
move it out of the ledger.

> **_PLAN:_** Consensus will manage the snapshots to produce stake distribution
> by pool that can be used by Consensus later to resolve queries about the
> LeaderSchedule. Ledger will not know about the Snapshots. In particular, the
> UTxO-HD report includes the concept of Snapshots of tables, which would be
> used to manage and access these snapshots.

## Open questions

> - Should Ledger return the diffs? they actually do it, but they then apply the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Should the Ledger return the diffs? It actually does it, but it then applies the
```

>   diffs. If we wanted to return then, there are many intermediate layers through

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  diffs. If we wanted to return them, there are many intermediate layers through
```

data IncrementalStake c = IStake
  { credMap :: !(Map (Credential 'Staking c) Coin)
  , ptrMap  :: !(Map Ptr Coin)
  }
```

- The stake snapshots

```haskell
( ne :: NewEpochState era )
  & ( nesEs       :: NewEpochState era -> EpochState           era  )
  & ( esSnapshots :: EpochState    era -> SnapShots (EraCrypto era) )

data SnapShots c = SnapShots
  { ssStakeMark          :: SnapShot c  -- Lazy on purpose
  , ssStakeMarkPoolDistr :: PoolDistr c -- Lazy on purpose
  , ssStakeSet           :: !(SnapShot c)
  , ssStakeGo            :: !(SnapShot c)
  , ssFee                :: !Coin
  }

data SnapShot c = SnapShot
  { ssStake       :: !(Stake c)
  , ssDelegations :: !(VMap VB VB (Credential 'Staking c) (KeyHash 'StakePool c))
  , ssPoolParams  :: !(VMap VB VB (KeyHash 'StakePool c) (PoolParams c))
  }

newtype Stake c = Stake
  { unStake :: VMap VB VP (Credential 'Staking c) (CompactForm Coin)
  }

newtype PoolDistr c = PoolDistr
  { unPoolDistr ::
      Map (KeyHash 'StakePool c) (IndividualPoolStake c)
  }

data IndividualPoolStake c = IndividualPoolStake
  { individualPoolStake    :: !Rational
  , individualPoolStakeVrf :: !(Hash c (VerKeyVRF c))
  }
```

> As noted by @jared.corduan, after CIP-1694 is complete, there will probably also

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As noted by [@JaredCorduan](https://github.com/JaredCorduan), after CIP-1694 is complete, there will probably also
```

  & ( lsUTxOState     :: LedgerState   era -> UTxOState                   era  )
  & ( utxosStakeDistr :: UTxOState     era -> IncrementalStake (EraCrypto era) )

data IncrementalStake c = IStake
  { credMap :: !(Map (Credential 'Staking c) Coin)
  , ptrMap  :: !(Map Ptr Coin)
  }
```

- The stake snapshots

```haskell
( ne :: NewEpochState era )
  & ( nesEs       :: NewEpochState era -> EpochState           era  )
  & ( esSnapshots :: EpochState    era -> SnapShots (EraCrypto era) )

data SnapShots c = SnapShots
  { ssStakeMark          :: SnapShot c  -- Lazy on purpose
  , ssStakeMarkPoolDistr :: PoolDistr c -- Lazy on purpose
  , ssStakeSet           :: !(SnapShot c)
  , ssStakeGo            :: !(SnapShot c)
  , ssFee                :: !Coin
  }

data SnapShot c = SnapShot
  { ssStake       :: !(Stake c)
  , ssDelegations :: !(VMap VB VB (Credential 'Staking c) (KeyHash 'StakePool c))
  , ssPoolParams  :: !(VMap VB VB (KeyHash 'StakePool c) (PoolParams c))
  }

newtype Stake c = Stake
  { unStake :: VMap VB VP (Credential 'Staking c) (CompactForm Coin)
  }

newtype PoolDistr c = PoolDistr
  { unPoolDistr ::
      Map (KeyHash 'StakePool c) (IndividualPoolStake c)

>   }

Reviewer: Here's the funny thing, though, @dcoutts : once the large structures are moved to a database, ledger doesn't even need the per-pool stake distribution! it is _only_ used by consensus for the leader check, and it entirely derived from the other large data structures.

>   }

Reviewer 3: Ok, but that doesn't obviously mean that it should be moved across the ledger/consensus boundary. I'm not saying it shouldn't but we should be clear about the reasons.

The way I would look at this is that the on-disk tables still belong to the ledger. The consensus provides the ledger with the facility to have on-disk tables (just as it provides state persistence, rollbacks etc). So something being in an on-disk table doesn't itself imply it has moved across the consensus/ledger boundary. It's like the consensus layer is the interpreter and the ledger is the logic or program being interpreted. The consensus layer shouldn't need to know about the content or purpose of the tables, it should just manage them as instructed by the ledger.

>   }

Reviewer: that's totally reasonable, but we are in the ~gray~ grey zone here for the consensus/ledger split. The "ledger protocol" logic/rules were moved to the consensus repo at the vasil hard fork. and all the per-pool stake distribution really is is an aggregation of the table that we know is not up for debate.

>   }

Reviewer 3: For this particular case, of the "protocol" rules needing access to the stake distribution, I think that does exactly fall either side of the boundary.

At a high level we would say that the Praos protocol (which is part of consensus) depends on the ledger for access to the stake distribution (or some suitable notion of a stake distribution). So maintaining that stake distribution (updating it as transactions are validated) should be the responsibility of the ledger, and then it needs to provide it to the Praos layer when needed.

So I think in this case, where one would logically draw the boundary at the high level tells us fairly clearly where we should draw the boundary here.

>   }

Reviewer: Let me try this from another angle. The ledger should never be given the entire per-stake-credential stake distribution (henceforth the PSCSD :grin: ), since that violates the rule that the ledger never hold "large" structures in memory. Instead, the ledger should give consensus instructions for what to do.

The per-pool stake distribution (PPSD) is small, and so the ledger is fine to hold it. But how does it the ledger give consensus instructions on how to make it? The instructions are the delegation map, which could be provided incrementally (each delegation is a "delta", as is each pool retirement"). And this is already a part of the plan, we know that the delegation relation will be a table (probably as a part of the "unified map").

So I can see two ways to get the PPSD to the ledger:
1. it maintains it's own incremental computation, using the txins, txouts, delegations, and retirements. and hopes that this always stays in since with the PSCSD maintained by consensus using the tables and the deltas provided by ledger.
2. consensus uses the PSCSD and the delegation relation to maintain another table for the small PPSD.

And just remember, that the PPSD is not used by any code in the ledger repo any more, it is only used for the leader check. It is not even a member of what consensus deems "the ledger state".

>   }

Reviewer 3: Yes, the reasonable designs to consider are continuously incrementally maintaining the by-pool distribution or doing a bulk computation over some phase of the epoch (implemented as an incremental traversal of the snapshot of the previous epoch by-stake-cred distribution).

Continuously incrementally maintaining the by-pool distribution sounds preferable, but also sounds tricky in the presence of fractional delegation. But if you think we can do it, then it means it's all in memory which is a lot easier.

>   }

Reviewer: > And just remember, that the PPSD is not used by any code in the ledger repo any more

@dcoutts as soon as I make a bold claim things begin too change. :laughing:  SPOs will get a stake-based vote in the Voltaire phase.

> general strategy for calling the `BBODY` rule, i.e. `(re)applyBlockOpts` and
> for calling the `TICK` rule, i.e. `applyTickOpts`.

### Stake distribution

The update to this map is performed by `updateStakeDistribution`. It is known
before calling the `BBODY` rule which UTxOs are going to be deleted and the rule
execution logic itself knows the UTxOs that are going to be added. Therefore we
can follow a logic similar to the above:

- Before calling the ledger rule we can query for the needed entries
- We can present the ledger with the values they asked for, but restricted to
  the data available in the disk + changelog
- The ledger will either provide diffs for the given values or will return
  updated values that we can then diff with the provided ones
- The resulting differences can be included in the current definition of the
  `DbChangelog`.

> **_PLAN:_** Consensus will have a new table on the `LedgerTables` that will
> represent the incremental stake distribution (maybe two tables, one for creds
> one for ptrs). It will have its own place on the `DbChangelog` too. The flow
> above describes the general strategy for calling the `BBODY` rule, i.e.

> > `(re)applyBlockOpts`.

Reviewer 3: The incrementally maintained stake distribution should be a table where we normally only need to do monoidal updates. This means we turn a read/write workload into a write only workload. This is covered in the original report and is the motivation for the inclusion of monoidal update tables (including in the prototype).

This is important for performance, otherwise we are going to be doing almost as many lookups in the stake distribution table as we do lookups in the utxo table. Lookups are the bottleneck for a write-optimised disk backend.

Reviewer: Are you suggesting that we do something more like double entry booking, where we (monoidally) send updates to two separate things, additions and deletions, and only combine them when needed?

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure about two separate things (what two?) but yes I am suggesting a table that can support monoidal updates, as well as insert/delete/lookup.

So for an incrementally updated stake distribution, that maps stake address to lovelace, it would be updated by the ledger working out the delta in stake arising for a stake address from a tx, and that is the table update. So in particular, the lovelace value of a spent input is a negative delta for that input's stake address, while lovelace outputs contribute positively to the balance of their corresponding stake addresses. Note that no lookup is needed: the sum total of the lovelace for a stake address is not needed.

And the practical consequence is the update-only workload is a write-only workload, which is much cheaper than a read/write workload.

> computing this view for the ledger (to ensure that reward withdrawals are
> correct within the given block).

## Snapshots and Leader Schedule

The `checkIsLeader` functions for Praos and TPraos makes use of the stake
distribution by stake pool in the `LedgerView` (see the definitions in
`ouroboros-consensus-protocol`). If the snapshots (and therefore the
`ssStakeMarkPoolDistr` field) reside in the Consensus side, we can produce the
relevant stake distributions when needed and don't involve the ledger. In any
case this functionality is in between Ledger and Consensus so it makes sense to
move it out of the ledger.

> **_PLAN:_** Consensus will manage the snapshots to produce stake distribution
> by pool that can be used by Consensus later to resolve queries about the
> LeaderSchedule. Ledger will not know about the Snapshots. In particular, the
> UTxO-HD report includes the concept of Snapshots of tables, which would be
> used to manage and access these snapshots.

Note that this implies creating a new package or component at the
Consensus-Ledger boundary whose owner would probably be the Consensus team as
its responsibilities would be related with computations required for the

> Consensus protocol (leader checks, and similar).

Reviewer 3: I'm slightly unclear about what this section is porposing. The stake distribution by pool is not large, so will not be an on-disk table. It will remain as an in-memory structure as it is now, within the ledger state and ledger view. I don't see the need for any consensus/ledger interface changes.

Reviewer: I commented on this above.

## Open questions

- Should the Ledger return the diffs? it actually internally compute diffs, but
  they the diffs are applied to the values before returning. If we wanted to
  return the diffs instead, there are many intermediate layers through which

>   they will have to be floated, but it should be doable.

Reviewer 3: If this refers to what I think it does, it's covered in the second report and in the prototype. The solution is to paramaterise the ledger rules by the table type, and then to use a "partial tracking map" which fits the map interface and also tracks the diffs. This gives us the diffs we want without any "real" changes in the ledger rules (just abstracting over the map interface for the on-disk tables).
